09:00:40
[Facilitator] Welcome everybody. We are just waiting for some remaining people to join the call as we near nine o'clock. So, we're going to leave a couple of minutes now just to allow any last people to come through and then we'll be making a start within two or three minutes.  

Thank you so much for being here with us. And we will have a proper introduction in just a moment.  And to be clear, this is the workshop on un-crewed aerial vehicles in shared airspace, you are in the right place. We’ll be making a start up in just a couple of minutes.  We've still got some people arriving, so we'll just allow them to come through and then we'll make a start.

And just a note to everybody, I am using the control to mute all participants just to make sure that we don't simultaneously hear about 60 people who've tapping away at the same time.  If at any point you want to contribute, you will need to unmute yourself, which should be available via the microphone icon, which is on the left most side of the icon bar.  Depending on what device we're using, the icon bar will either be visible at the bottom of your screen or you may need to hover the mouse near the top and find a selection of icons.  If you're on a mobile device or if you're using the browser version of Zoom, then you may need to select the three dots icon, which will show a cascade of different icons with more controls but I will reiterate these as we go through. So, there's no need to worry.

We're almost 60 participants now. We still have a few people coming through.  So we will make a start in just a moment. 

Great. OK, so we are at 60 participants, I've just look for a thumbs up from my team.  If we're good to go ahead are we happy? Great OK

So welcome, everybody. And first off, a big thank you for attending today. We really appreciate you finding the time to be with us, especially since I'm sure that we've all had enough of Zoom calls by now.  We will try and make this as straightforward as possible and save you any technical frustrations.

My name is Facilitator and I'm going to be your facilitator for today. In a moment,
we're going to be hearing from my colleagues who will lead us through a presentation explaining the background and details of this project.  Allow me to just go through some quick housekeeping first, however.  So, this workshop is coming as part of a research project.  And the purpose of today is to record the views of you as participants.  Those who signed up via Eventbrite will have received a sheet of information that details what you're consenting to by participating.  So, to reiterate, anyone is free to exit this workshop at any time.  We understand that you also may have other commitments. So, if you need to head off for any reason, please feel free to do so.  The workshop is being recorded for internal use only and all data will be anonymised and may be used as part of the project's outputs.  So, by remaining in the workshop from this point on, you are agreeing to these terms.  So if anyone can't consent to these terms, it would be best to exit now.

With that being said, I would just outline some technical details.  We would like to give everybody the chance to be heard.  So, to make that possible within the limitations of Zoom would invite you to please make use of the chat as we go through.  So, the chat is accessible via an icon at the bottom of your screen, or as I mentioned beforehand if you're using the Web version of Zoom or from a mobile device, you will need to look for your icon bar.  And there will either be an icon with a speech bubble labelled ‘chat’, or you may need to select a three-dot icon and then you will see an icon with a speech bubble labelled ‘chat’.  If you click on that, a chat bar will open and you'll be able to type responses in there.  That will be visible to the group.  You also have the option of private messaging, in which case your submissions will only be visible to myself or whoever you select.  There is an option, a little blue bar that has a list of names inside it.  I'm down as [Facilitator].  If you select me, you can send me a message.  And then I will see your message. But it will not be visible to the rest of the group.  So as we go through today, if you have comments or questions that you'd like us to return to after the presentation, please do so by leaving a message in the chats and using that chat icon, which is a speech bubble labelled chat.

So, in a moment, we're going to go into the initial presentation. This will last for about 20 minutes. If you have questions as we go through, if there are any points that you think need to be clarified, please say so in the chat and then I will return to these afterwards and ensure that everybody's points are covered.

If you have any difficulties doing this, if for any reason the chat isn't working for you, then we will have the opportunity for you to simply speak up afterwards.  All that you need to do in that case is to unmute yourself by clicking the mute icon on the left side of your icon bar and then we will be able to hear you.  It would help if you make use of the reactions which are again accessible via the icon bar with a smiley face icon. There should be an option to raise hand, or you can select one of the other pictures of hands that will just help me to see that you have a point.  But again, if this sounds like too many icons to keep track of that's fine. You can just speak up and I will make sure that we cover your point.

So please, just to go over that once again. If you feel the need for any clarification while the presentation is going forwards or if you have any questions you would like us to  return to please leave comments and the chats or you can speak up afterwards we will make sure we come to you. So, without further ado, I will hand over to my colleagues who will introduce themselves and we will have the opportunity to listen to the presentation and receive some more information about the overall project. So I will mute myself now and. 
09:06:50  
[TC] [Facilitator] Thanks very much, [Facilitator]. Good morning, everyone. Janet, if you just share the slide, that would be great. Just get the slides up in front of us.

Good morning, everyone, and thank you very much, Facilitator, for the background information there, it's great to have you with us today and welcome to this Recreational Airspace Users online workshop, which is all about how we can go about managing drones in shared airspace.  

09:07:21 Next slide, please. 

So, my name is Tom Cherrett. I'm the head of the Transportation Research Group at the University of Southampton. And it's a pleasure to welcome you all to this event today. 

So you will all be aware of the increasing debate around drones being used in various commercial settings with lots of claims about their potential to bring about speedier and more sustainable logistics. But the key issue is how would we best manage those in shared space, air space amongst everything else that's going on?  And also, would their mass introduction potentially, 
how would that impact on the many general aviation users such as yourselves going forward and in what particular way?  So, we really want you to try and help us to start unpack some of these issues and hence this this initial workshop today to start looking at some of these things.  

So in terms of that kind of purpose, what we'd like to do is to give you some brief background information about the way medical logistics are starting to look at drones as potential additions to logistics fleets to assist in moving product around.  We've been doing all the work and background with the NHS and looking at their interest in this.  And I'll give you a few slides on that shortly.  We want to engage to understand your concerns and issues, you know, immediate reactions to some of this. How are you finding it? What are some of the issues that you foresee coming up? And we want to go forward to kind of work with you, just yourselves to develop more, you know, collective operating procedures that are more widely acceptable to all.

Jim will talk more about temporary danger areas and the difficulties with those. So, we want to basically start getting your input into this and what we need to do more widely.  So, I will basically introduce a little bit about the background to these projects that are funding this research and just give a little introduction to the way the NHS is seeing drones being used in medical logistics.

My colleague, Professor Jim Scanlan, will introduce himself in a moment and he will focus much more on airspace and operational risk.  And we'll be giving some experiences from our work that we did last year as part of the Covid 19 trial, flying the ultra-drone to the Isle of Wight and looking at some of these implications of operating drones in shared airspace and a new idea that we're putting forward called Class Lima, which Jim will introduce. 

09:09:46 Next slide, please. Just to introduce you to the team of researchers who are working on this work.  We have Professor Janet Dickinson, who is based in the faculty of management at Bournemouth University.  She has a lot of experience in public engagements in relation to new transport systems.  And we'll be looking at that specifically and how the public think about and accept the concept of drones being used on a more wider scale.

Dr Nic Jelev is an aircraft designer and he's part of the University of Southampton's un-crewed aerial systems team. He has a PhD in aircraft design optimisation and he's head and heads up our ultra-fixed wing, a drone development the Windracers. And that platform is currently going to be flown to the Isles of Scilly in a week's time.  He also has many hours of flying experience working, being a glider pilot himself.

Aliaksei Pilko is a PhD researcher in autonomous airspace simulation and he's particularly looking at ground risk modelling as part of drone routing.  Really interesting concept of, you know what? What is it safe to fly over, what particular times of day, etc.  He is also president of the Southampton University Gliding Club and has many hours of gliding experience.

Mr German Moreno is an un-crewed aircraft systems engineer and he acts as the regulatory lead for the, um, crude aerial systems team at university.  He has a lot of experience in developing drone safety cases and liaising with the CAA and has a former military background in terms of piloting aircraft.

And finally, my colleague, Dr Matt Grote, who works with me in the transportation research group University of Southampton, has a background in carbon modelling looking at transport systems from that perspective. 
But more importantly, and relevant to this was a commercial aviation pilot for 15 years.  So has a lot of first-hand experience of some of these issues.

Next slide, please.

In terms of yourselves, we have a fantastic attendance today. It's great to see such interest in this area.  So we've got over 30 GA pilots and four glider pilots, microlight pilots, a whole variety of people from different regulators and other networks, et cetera.  And you can see a good mixture of people there that we'd all need to engage more proactively going forward in some of these issues.  So it's great to have so many of you on board with us today.

09:12:19  Next slide, please.

Just a little bit of background on the projects that are behind the funding to this said the first one is called E-Drone, and that is funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council.  It started in January and goes through to the end of 2023, involves the University of Southampton, 
Bournemouth University, University College London and the University of Leeds.

And it's really about looking into how drones will be become part of mixed fleet operations. You know, how will some of the large logistics companies actually utilise these? What will be the costs of using them in different circumstances? And to what extent will they be able to bring more wider benefits in certain circumstances?  And, you know, how will we get the public on board in the wider acceptance of systems like this going forward?

The Future Transport Zone Project is from the Department of Transport. 
That's a much larger piece of work. It's 29 million pounds in total value and covers elements of mobility as a service under theme one and freight's topics under theme two one of the freight topics is to do with drones.  And we'll look to develop a traffic management system for managing drones in the Solent region and it's specifically geared to doing test cases with the NHS in terms of medical logistics between the hospitals in the region.  That's our kind of goal with that. But there's many more wider issues it is looking at in terms of dangerous goods legislation for carriage by un-crewed aerial vehicles and the human factors, elements of how we integrate drones into existing traffic control systems themselves.

09:13:54 Next slide, please.

So there's a little animation here which will hopefully play, but we've done a lot of work with the NHS looking at the potential implications of introducing drones. This little animation on the right hand side is playing a little bit slowly. But there are at the moment twelve vans that do pathology collections, patient diagnostic collections from the 70 surgeries in the Southampton area.  And that's a dedicated service that they're moving. They're serving each surgery twice a day, five days a week.  And we've been working with the NHS to look at how some of the remote surgeries, 
particularly the new forest, might be better served by un-crewed aerial vehicles.

And it's quite interesting in terms of some of the simulations to see how integrating some of these platforms are particularly going over to things like the Isle of Wight could save considerable mileage in terms of CO2 implications, but also very importantly in the current types of operation.  A lot of the pathology labs don't receive samples till after midday because they're all in vans being transferred around. And obviously that implicates has implications for their human resource planning.  So, we know that using UAVs to move very light loads of samples, 40 in each batch, basically could be moved to the hospital much quicker and faster in the morning.  So, there's a lot of interest in the way this might work. But I think more widely we see different types of drone for trunking movements and going between distribution points.  As you can see, the ultra-drone in the top photograph there, and then more point-to-point work going from helipad to helipad with vertical take-off and landing pieces of equipment.  So what areas of the NHS might be most appropriate for the integration of drones?

09:15:30 Next slide please Janet

So patient diagnostics is one area that the NHS is very interested in.  So typically, a, you will have all on this call, will have had a blood sample or something taken probably over the last three to four months, some points. And, you know, the vast majority of samples that are taken are in the areas of blood, urine or stool samples. But there are over 56 different types of sample routinely taken and they are moved around and the UN 3373 dangerous goods legislation in the containers that you can see at the bottom there.

But as I was saying, this is largely van based. And, you know, there are issues in terms of the temporal provision of services.  So how can we get things moved quickly from more remote places?  And that will obviously impact on the quality of patient care.

09:16:16 Next slide please

The next area of interest is blood and particularly the emergency movements of blood.  There are routine blood movements between hospitals all the time.  In the middle here, you can see blood bags that are being moved from Southampton General Hospital across on the ferry to St. Mary's on the Isle of Wight.  You can see the VersaPacks on the left. They're quite heavy load, sometimes up to 13 kilograms, but instead more emergency ad hoc movements of blood that might be more suitable for movement via drones. That's another interesting area. 

09:16:50 Next slide, please. 

I think the really interesting one is what we call cytotoxic drugs or chemotherapy treatments.  And this is where there's been quite a lot of interest because they're obviously very high value of some of these drugs. So, you know, several thousand pounds per unit for one patient.  And they have often have a very short shelf life because a lot of drugs are bespoke, made for the patients.  They are part of a patient care plan. They had to be made and then transported.  And often in the case of some drugs have to be administered to the patients within four and a half hours of being made to is tailor made for a kind of drone transport solution.  And certainly in the case of the Isle of Wight, St Mary's Hospital lost its aseptic medicine unit in the summer of last year. So now all their medicines are made offsite and at the moment they have to be made. And it's a taxi ride, a ferry or a hovercraft. And then another taxi ride up. So, again, it's the potential implication on patient care of speeding this up and patients not having to potentially travel to the mainland to receive treatment. So there's quite a lot of interest in that particular one.

09:17:53 Next slide please

So we have quite a bit of experience on trying to operate a large fixed wing drone as part of the air bridge trial that was undertaken as part of the Future Transport Zone project back in between March and May last year, where we use the ultra aircraft. You can see in the bottom picture there.

And we were flying between Leea- on- Solent and Binstead on the Isle of Wight.  And the idea here was really to see whether we could set up a service that could be used in the event of there being significant issues with the current logistics system serving the Isle of Wight.  And thankfully, everything ran pretty smoothly from that perspective. But it was a very good example of how we integrate with manned aircraft, how we communicate with Air Traffic Control 1, holding patterns, transitioning to beyond visual line of sight.  And Jim will come onto this in a bit more detail. 

09:18:43 Next slide, please.

This little video hopefully will play for you.  It's a bit jerky, but this is Ultra actually one of its flights going from Lea on Solent over to BinstedBinstead So Ultra is really designed to carry 100 kilograms, a thousand kilometres.  So it's been designed really for working places like Africa. It has a lot of sophisticated technology on it. It particularly features having no single points of failure. So in terms of the avionics and Jim and the team will be to answer any specific questions on this, but that's one of the whole points. It's got to be robust technology that can work in various hostile environments.  And so this will be the approach coming into BinstedBinstead. So the idea was we could we could basically carry a range of different cargos in this the payload.  This area is about the size of an estate car boot, to give you some idea.  So it was a very interesting introduction into how we might utilise aircraft like this in the future.  So, I've got to hand over to Jim now to talk a little bit more about some of the issues that we had in terms of managing shared airspace in this in this particular instance.  And Jim will be able to take this forward a bit more detail. Over to you Jim. 09:19:53

09:19:59 [JS] Can you hear me? Yeah, I got you. Good.  So, for those who don't know me on Jim Scanlan, I'm ex Airbus, ex British Aerospace before I move into academia and I currently lead the drone activities at Southampton University and more importantly, from my personal perspective I am a keen GA pilot so I have share in an aircraft and fly from Thruxton, I'm delighted to say I've already got my check flight to resume flying.  

So what's all the fuss about? The answer is TDAs, so I'm very grateful to Steve Slater's LAA column I didn't realise this, but there's something like 80 applications for B.V. loss BVLoS in the UK currently.  And that involves effectively putting brick walls up in particularly class G airspace which is certainly very unpopular with air space users.  It segregates airspace. It's inefficient. So when they're active, we restrict the airspace to exclude all other airspace users.  They tend to be owned. So each TDA is owned by someone. So it tends to be only used by UAV operation at a time.  They're temporary. And they involve a huge amount of effort.   And so we understand the frustrations and the annoyance associated with TDAs.  They're not the long-term solution. And really, this session is asking the question, is there an alternative? Can we do something else relatively quickly? 

09:21:49 So next slide, please. 

So quick status update. So as airspace used as whether we like it or not, there is strong demand for public good drone services and I believe that o	[R and D 2] might be on the call. So he is heading a project to to, amongst other things, use drones in the Highlands and islands and maybe he can help us explore that issue. And certainly I have relatives that live in the Shetland's who are all saying we want drones.  We would like to be to have better logistics connections.

09:22:32 Next point, please. I think the low hanging fruit for all of this and what I mean by that is, is to develop real services is the start in what we call low risk areas, and they happen to be remote regions that already have poor logistics connections so it makes sense to stop it. Next point. 

We believe there aren’t any acceptable airspace management tools that will be widely accepted by the airspace community.  

09:22:56 Next point.  

I know a fair that's UTM, and I have been following all the Jarus JARUS and ALSAEASA developments. My personal opinion is that it may well be five years away before it's fully implemented.  So, we don't want to wait for UTM. And even when it arrives.

09:23:36 Next point.  I think it's overkill for low risk regions because it implies a service essentially and I'll explain what I mean by that. 
09:23:50 next point. 

And for logistics operations, it's a big worry as to the cost of UTM because logistics carriers operate on wafer thin margins. And so cost is a very important issue in designing solutions.  

09:24:18 Next, slide. Sorry, I didn't mean slide I meant bullet point. So the overarching issue is how do we better manage integration of drones into shared airspace? 

09:24:26 So now next slide.

So to be honest, our thinking was triggered by editorials like these, and I'm very grateful to the various journalists and editors of  Publications like Pilot and Flyer, so chopping out great chunks of Class G airspace exclusively for drones is unacceptable and has to be resisted.  You know what? I agree. So, we started making a wish list of what we would like. So, number one, we want something that doesn't involve segregation. We want some air space that's renewable so that if it works and it's acceptable, it becomes a more permanent fixture. We don't want it to be reliant on UTM. We'd like it to be robust and simple. We'd like to facilitate multiple drone operators.  We appreciate that it's only applicable in low air traffic density areas.  It wasn't operating complex airspace and high-density airspace in high risk areas. 
But actually, that's where the low hanging fruit lies. So that's where our interest lies.

I'm going to talk about compliance in a second. But we're only proposing this for compliant and therefore quite sophisticated drones. And it's obviously going to be using some form of transponder technology, but we want to make that as transponder technology agnostic as possible.  And finally, there's no point in doing all of this unless we can do it relatively quickly.  If this is going to be five years away, then it's perhaps not worth pursuing. 

09:26:25 OK. Next slide, please. 

So, this is a very rough draught of our vision, and we're calling it class Lima might be stupid name and that's something we'd like to debate later on. But for now, that's what we're calling it. So, the idea is that we would designate an area of operation so it would have boundaries and it would have height altitude limits and all drone operators within this area would publish not only the status of the life status of every platform, but also the intentions, i.e. the flight plans so that airspace users could quite easily using a tablet or smartphone see what's going on in this airspace, both in terms of intentions and live status of all platforms.

09:27:28 Next point. We believe it would be a good idea if all drones operating in this area were capable of automatic collision avoidance and we've started trying this on a variety of drones at the university so that the drones automatically a bit TCAS-like like avoid other EC. sources.  And this is relatively simple and it seems to work reasonably well.  It seems to be a sensible thing to do. It's a final layer in the safety stack.

09:28:08 Next point. We think it would make sense for drones to broadcast to suitably equipped other airspace users a ADVS-B Oout.  So, again, another opportunity for other airspace users to see nearby drones in this area.  

09:28:29 Next on. And we would expect operators to also be dynamically modifying flight plans as they perceive possible airprox risks.  So if they see a track that's entering this airspace, they would be very conservative and manoeuvre to minimise airprox risks.  And like I say, a bit about airprox shortly. 

09:28:58 Next point.

Another thing that we're toying with is the idea UAVs all broadcasting automatically on VHF position reports on either public and published frequency or something like Safety-com.  So again, this is another layer of safety so that, for example, manned aircraft could detect and listen out on the VHF frequency. And get position reports very latest flight from each drone for example.  Whether we're allowed to do this, we don't know.  And we understand issues of congested VHF frequencies.  We're in discussion with Ofcom about this as a possibility, but it's relatively simple for us to do.

09:29:58 Next point. 

And we would like the UAVs in this zone to perhaps embody some good airmanship rules and it's a thing called multi spherical compliance, which I'll talk about very shortly, where drones effectively fly pattens.  

09:30:23 Next slide, please. So, we've been doing a lot of risk modelling and airspace simulation. And the reason we've been doing that, so both air risk and ground risk modelling is that we're starting to follow a thing called SORA.  So this the ARSOEASA/JARUS thinking that I actually like and I think it makes sense. So we want to make sure that anything we do is SORA a compliant in the future.  This essentially requires you to undertake two steps. One is to work out the ground risks that is associated with your operation.  And if it's higher than a certain threshold, you're simply not allowed to operate.  And in the bottom right, my colleague Alex has been doing a lot of simulation work. 

And one of the tools we've developed, which is going to be an open source, two, is an automatic drone path planning tool that understands the ground risk.  And so, for instance, include lots of GIS data as well as traffic modelling.  So essentially answers the question, where are people likely to be?  And so it's time-based. It varies throughout the day, depending on where people like to be. And then in terms of the multi spherical rule, 

09:31:55 So can we just advance the slides for one click?

Alex has been doing lots of airprox simulation, so taking a block of air space, populating it with lots of drones, flying random paths and if those drones follow flight patterns, what's the effect? And this is very similar to the quadrantalgle rule that is now defunct and is now the semi-circular rule.
But the advantage of drones is that they are likely, if they are programmed to do so, to follow those rules very slavishly and fly very accurately and so there's potentially a benefit in getting drones to follow a pattern.  They will be less likely to suffer air proxsy with each other.

09:32:49 OK. Next slide, please. 

So I'm sure many people on this call will be aware of they the Goodwood incident so there's a public AAIB report which reports on a crash of a drone.  And there's a lot of lessons to learn from that. And quite a lot of drones still use and have used hobby grade components and systems that are perhaps not good enough and perhaps not sufficiently airworthy for the sorts of things that we want to do.  There's currently a lack of standards, and I'm not sure if it will ever be possible to write a certification document for drones.  And certainly if that's possible, it's probably going to be a long time away.  So we're starting to develop what we called a shared knowledge repository. So it's a document that we'll be very happy to share. In fact it's on our website where we've listed experience and suggestions for aircraft in the future that might want to access something like Class Lima, which defines a minimum set of airworthiness standards.  It's not a formal document. It's not a legal document. It's just a checklist essentially of lessons learnt.  And we would certainly be interested in people collaborating and developing this into a more formal document, perhaps.

09:34:32 Next slide, please. 

For the Ultra Drone, it's big and heavy. Therefore, higher risk. It's certainly in the specific category of drones and we work very hard right from the word go to make sure it is as airworthy as possible.  So it literally has no single points of failure on the aircraft.  You may notice, for example, twin engines. We followed good aircraft design practice.  So you'll see in the bottom left photo lots of structural testing of the structure.  We have multi-layer fault tolerant command and control communications links in particular We have very high integrity avionics. Next slide, please.

So this was a big issue for us, actually, because finding a flight control system, so an autopilot system that is affordable, yet very high integrity and robust was something we found very difficult and in the end, we have a spin out from the investor developed a system that we call masterless.  The idea is that you can simply add resources and so you can add autopilots we typically fly with at least three autopilots. A no one of those autopilots is controlling the aircraft. And if one of them fails for some reason, it's a non-event for very high-risk flights.  You could add more than three auto pilots. In fact, that applies to all resources on the aircraft.  So, altitude control, navigation technology, pitot static systems we can we can simply add multiple units seamlessly.  And it was all about genuinely being able to declare that we have zero points of failure on this aircraft.  And believe you me, we've been through a very bruising encounter with the CAA's top rottweiler for the past couple of weeks crawling all over our system to give us full air worthiness to fly a variety of missions.

09:37:02 OK, next slide. 

So we want to go through a number of steps, so step one is this event to talk to a cross-section of airspace users to see whether you think this is a good idea or not and to get your views and to help shape this idea before we take it any further.  And if it looks like a good idea and if we get support for this, we're going to propose we do some trials and sadly, initially, we will probably have to do that in segregated airspace but we would like to open that up. And inevitably will want to operate multiple drones in that airspace.  We happen to have manned test aircraft owned by the university.  So we will use that to do a lot of our testing. We want to test the multi spherical rule.  And there's all sorts of questions about what height standards you use for that pressure altitude, flight level, geo altitude, all sorts of research questions that we want to test the VHF out to see whether that works, whether it's useful for nearby aircraft to hear what drones are doing.  And of course, we've got a stack of work to do on ECD detection and avoidance trials. I know that we have representatives from a company called Neuron on call and we'll be collaborating with them to work out how best to approach this.

09:38:50 Okay. Next slide, please. 

So, I'll hand back to [Facilitator] at this point, because this is the point of which would want to start debate and questions and start to get your views on a whole bunch of issues.


09:39:09 [Facilitator] Thanks very much, Jim. So thank you to everybody who has been putting questions into the chats there is a great wealth of stuff coming through that already, which we will do our very best to cover for the time being, however, we have five different points which have come up during the research so far that may cover some of the questions that people already have.  So, first of all, Janet, could you just. There we go.

09:39:40 So is this just the type of TMZ? I will allow Jim and Tom to reply to this. 
You can see the initial indication of what the answer might be here. 
But Jim and Tom, if you'd like to just fill in any more detail, is Class Lima just another type of TMZ? 

09:40:00 [JS] So this is a question that has been raised.  So I've spoken to many of the people that are that are currently on this call And quite a number people pointed out, look, this just sounds like a TMZ.  So a transponder mandatory zone. And in a sense it is. But it's our understanding that TMZs generally need a service and therefore need to be covered by service.  So we would prefer for various reasons to not need to have a formal ANSP service.  Why? Because we'll probably have some of these areas in remote regions where it's difficult to provide such a service.  And I believe it's unnecessary and will add complication cost.  So I would welcome comments, views.

09:41:03 [Facilitator] So just to remind the way they were going through this we're just going to cover these initial topics that have come up in the projects so far and then we will have the opportunity to open up for questions. We may take a short break before we get to the questions, depending on how long this takes.  

And one minor point, when people are contributions to the discussion, it would be helpful if we can unpack any acronyms just to make sure that everybody's able to keep up with the conversation, since there are quite a few acronyms coming out so far. So in the interest of making this as open as possible, it would help if we unpack any of them.  

09:41:47 So next question. What should drones use?  Height, altitude, original pressure, session settings, flight level Geo height, a MSL reference?  Again, I'll let Jim and Tom respond to that.

09:42:04 [JS] Yeah. This is a this is actually quite complex issue and people that are experienced aviators are very familiar with these issues.  But if we're managing airspace within an area in some way, we need to make sure that we don't have any confusion over height, altitudes, et cetera, et cetera.  And so that's something we need to unpick.  We need to do a lot of work on it. Our preference for drones is that they fly perhaps geo altitude and again, they can just do what they're told.  But of course, there is always the chance that the GMSSGNSS system might fail.  Again, I'd point out that we tend to fly multiple GMSSGNSS systems and we've done a lot of research into the probability of GNMSS failures and we think it's very low.  Nevertheless, if you get GMSSGNSS failure, you may have to resort to other things.  So know pressure, altitude of some flavour so that's another issue that we need to debate.

09:43:35 [Facilitator] Great. So next one, we've got weather whether VHF out is a good idea and for what frequencies?  There have been some questions appearing in the chat here in terms of whether that frequency could get overloaded.  So I'll just allow Jim to respond to this, since this is something that's been coming up fairly frequently in the chat.

09:43:58 [JS] Well, this is just an idea. But if I was flying a manned aircraft in a particular region,  I would probably like to be able to listen out on the VHF frequency and just know what might be happening around me.  So what we have in mind is technically very easy to do is to have the drone give position reports every 30 seconds or so altitude heading, et cetera, et cetera, and identifier, rather simply, technically easy to do I imagine the regulatory issues will be difficult and it'll be interesting to hear other airspace users views on whether this this makes sense.  And in the spirit of this. Let's not forget, you know, Class G airspace, for example, is a very, very precious resource.  And, you know, I want to defend that as much as possible.  And so what we're trying to do is to find out if there is some way of sharing that very precious resource at all.  So this is just an idea. Again, I'd love comments from people.

09:45:23 [Facilitator] Thank you. So next one here. What about alternative detects and avoids the technologies such as vision, lidar, radar, sonic?

09:45:35 [JS] Yes, so we as a university constantly monitor this and do a lot of work on this.  I'm constantly amazed. At the technology that's coming down the pipeline.  So you can buy a drone called the Sky Dio, which has six 4K cameras mounted on it. This is less than a kilo or two and it's doing real time image processing of six 4K cameras.  So basically, it's a flying supercomputer. So I wouldn't rule out vision systems in the future playing the role. But right now, the research we've done shows that it's very difficult to provide robust solution for detect and avoid, you know, closing speeds and small size of drones in all weather radar might be a little more promising, but issues of size, weight and power and cost, of course, are an issue.  There's a group at Birmingham University and are doing some really good work on very high fidelity, low cost radar systems so we're in touch with them. But we don't want to depend on any of these technologies. We think transponder solution is a good enough solution for what we would like to do.  

09:47:13 [Facilitator] So last point on this slide, does Class Lima have connotations and would there be a better label for this class? 

09:47:25 [JS] Yeah, this has been pointed out.  I had a long conversation with someone hopefully on the call, you know are we actually genuinely creating a new class of air space?  Maybe not. So maybe we should give it back to a different badge.  So, again, I'd love feedback on what we should do from here on in. Maybe we're not going to create a new class.

09:47:56 [Facilitator] So I will invite people to respond to that last point, what they think of the labelling of Class Lima does it make sense?  Please leave a comment in the chat if you have anything to respond to that,  I will just turn now to a few of the questions that have been appearing in the chat, just picking up from that last point somebody has asked whether Class Lima is simply just using Class G airspace and is there a substantial difference between them? 

09:48:23 [JS] Oh, that's a great question. So our vision is, yes, it would be uncontrolled airspace.

09:48:34 [Facilitator] So I'm going to try and take these through in relatively chronological order.  We've had a lot of topics coming up in the chat, so I will just try and cover a few of them and hopefully combine a few where there has been common topics coming up. And then we can open up the discussion.  So to begin with there was a question early on asking how many transits have taken place between Lea on Solent and BinstedBinstead during the trial?

09:48:59 [JS] OK. I can field that one.  So we undertook the Isle of Wight test in baby steps, so we flew a little foam aeroplane backwards and forwards a number of times, which had an identical avionics fit to just check you know, coms, integrity with a low risk platform.  And then with the large platform, we flew halfway back and did a lot of halfway steps before we made our flight to BinstedBinstead.  We only did that flight once for various reasons.   The same platform, however, has been flown extensively, for example, to the Scilly Isles 

And in fact, this week has been flying extensively in XXX before we were grounded by the Hawk crash yesterday.

09:50:05 [Facilitator] So I'll just mention also there were some really good contributions coming through the chat, potential ideas of how this could all be made to cohere when we get into the next session of section after the break, we will be using an open, interactive white boards to record everybody's contributions.  So please keep those points in mind and make sure we've got them recorded in the next section.  For now, however, there was a question early on again, comparing the use of drones to available alternatives.  For instance, hovercrafts can make similar trips in a similar time. And what's the weather limitations on drones as compared to vans or ferries?  And how do they cope with different terrain, including high altitude terrain on the associated valleys?  So do drones offer a really superior alternative to existing options, like vans and ferries that can operate potentially in more weather conditions?

09:51:11 [JS] So, can I ask my colleagues, German and Nic, perhaps to just comment on that?

09:51:22 [NJ] Yeah, so I'll start off. Our aircraft is designed to operate, the large Ultra aircraft to operate in very windy conditions so we've flown it very regularly, 25, 30 knots, winds at ground level and 40 to 45 knots at altitude.  So from a point of view, this particular platform can operate in these particular conditions and it is not an issue we're currently undergoing testing for rain and ice conditions for altitude level testing.  So that for us is not a particular problem. The benefit it would offer is for this particular platform and again, it's different for other platforms is that it is linking the Isles of Scilly, for example, that the test case where a ferry would take four or five hours And there are particular scheduled flights for from certain areas.  So over the winter, for example, there were only flights from Lands End to the Scilly Isles So and they are scheduled at a particular point and they set limitations for that. So having the drones operating from an alternative airfield or an alternative place gives the flexibility for hospitals and other potential uses that might wish to send cargo across in these kind of use cases.  

09:53:09 [TC] I think I’ll just add to that as well You know, I think it's very important from a logistics perspective to say the drones are not going to take over from vans you know that I think it is a more bespoke element to be used in certain circumstances.  You know, I think I remember looking at some statistics. I think 2019 we had nine named storms. You know, so from our experiences operating in the Solent you know, there will be many days we know where you would not be able to fly potentially with smaller platforms.  And so, you know, it's very important to take into consideration in logistics planning and just under what circumstances can they be used and what are the limitations in terms of whether those aspects.  So it's a it's something that has to be considered very carefully when you're doing, you know, optimal mixed fleet planning of how these systems work.  And that's part of the simulation, working as E-drone to, you know, look at, you know, what is the real use case here and how reliable would this be going forward? Which is a key component. 

09:54:03 [Facilitator] I'm just picked up on a point that has appeared recently in chats talking about the efficacy of systems to detect vs. the human eye.  Is there available evidence about what's actually overall offers the safest option in terms of detect and avoid technology?  The automated technology is there overall less accidents involved, is it in the data? Does it appear to be a safer option?

09:54:35 [JS] Can I suggest German perhaps responds on this one, because he's been doing a lot of thinking transponder technology.   And the other point I would make is that, you know, for GA pilots VMC is quite, quite a challenge.  You know, I never fly in VMC Minima because I know that I probably have 30 seconds to detect an aircraft.  What is it, five kilometres away. So, you know, the human eye is it is it can be very good, but I don't think it's a great benchmark actually would want to be substantially better than a human eye. German if you got any comments you'd want to make?

09:55:26 [GM] Well I personally haven't seen any data related to the reliability of, say, like see and avoid compared to any other mechanisms like like like like lidar or electric conspicuity. The beauty of electronic conspicuity is that we that we can actually measure the reliability of systems and we can measure that reliability of those signals going from one device to the other.  So that's a good thing that that is actually measurable. Whilst the usual mechanisms of a pilot seeing out of the window and being able to detect that was something that unfortunately we cannot measure.  However, research has been done with regard to human factors and how the ability of detecting some threats is reduced with the time that the person spends in the cockpit and things like that.  So I believe that the tech to avoid based on electronics insecurity would be at least that that that way we can actually show results of reliability.

09:56:40 [Facilitator] Thank you. So I will. We will take its field, some of these questions up until about 10:00. Then we'll take a five minute break, after which we will return and we'll open up discussion for people to ask their questions directly. For now, however, numerous people have picked up on the issue of how to incorporate cooperative and noncooperative flyers, including birds, model flyers.  How exactly are all of these different potential risks going to be accounted for in an automated detect and avoid system?  

09:57:21 [JS] Yes. So, yeah, I think bird strike is an interesting one.  I'm not really sure what to say about that.  I'm not sure what technology, even a very alert person in a manned aircraft.  You know how successful. And even if you see a bird. I mean, I frequently see I fly Truckston Thruxton a lot of and there are some large raptors around there by the time I have seen it I am not sure what I can do about it.  I would like to know more about the question really, I don’t think it is going to be very easy to avoid birds full stop.  However, there's an airworthiness issue in that what happens if you have a bird strike?  And that's a different question. And that's why, personally, I like zero the single point of failure systems so if we had a bird strike that took out one of our propellers or engines, our aeroplane is one of our aeroplanes is perfectly capable of continuing safe flight.  In terms of a more, tricky question is we set up, let's imagine we've set up a Class Lima and we had the support of the air space or that the people that use air space around there we would then have to exclude, so it would become a TMZ.  So people that want to fly in that region that don't have transponders would simply not be allowed to.  And therefore, that bit that quite a lot of work needed to be done to set up this because, let's face it, the alternative at the moment to set up a TDA and then no one's allowed in it.  So what we're saying is we would allow some people in this zone, but we'd have to plan it carefully so we don't have to avoid areas that are heavily used by hang glider pilots, parachutists to gliders that don't want to carry transponders, etc, etc.  I don't know whether my fellow panel members have anything to add to that?

10:00:00 [NJ] I will just add one thing as well, when we say transponder,  we are open to all electronic conspicuity devices and that that's the key thing is we don't necessarily want that to be a Mode S only transponder,  which is expensive with fairly technologically agnostic.  We take the view that the general community should, well, we are the general community, but the community should have a say in what type of device is used, whether that's from a ADS-B or any existing equipment that's already fitted on GA aircraft.  That would be my point.

10:00:39 [Facilitator] OK, so we're going to take a break in just a moment. For now, however, I will just point out some people have been mentioning some experiences in Oban and with Skye Scotland they said was a bad experience and something of a tokenistic consultation.  I think it would be useful for us to understand the experience that since this project is entering into the consultation period.  So if anybody's body, you can provide a kind of testimony of how that process has gone, that would be really useful for us to understand.  Furthermore,  price of the necessary equipment to coordinate within the class Lima concept is understandably a big concern.  Various people in the chat have been commenting on the available grants for transponders.  So when we return, it would be useful if the panel could clarify what grants are currently available before we open up into a wider discussion where people can share their concerns about potential costs. For now, however, I will round off by just asking what kind of coordination has there been between different commercial operators who may be using different systems? They may be using different firmware, different software.  What kind of coordination has been taking place or will be taking place in the future to ensure that any kind of guidance is coordinated and this consistent use the same systems that will be equally reliable and able to participate on an equal basis within a system like Class Lima?

10:02:14 [JS] What a great question. Again, I'd invite fellow panel members to react.  I mean, we've been I mean, one of the things we've done over the years as a university is and if we if we're talking about auto pilot systems,  we have played with, developed, evaluated huge numbers of auto pilot systems, if that's what we're talking about, It might be wider that just auto pilot systems, flight control systems and honestly, there's quite a lot of hobby stuff out there. And from our recent encounter with the CAA, by the way, I'm not at all critical of the CAA I think their recent scrutiny over certainly our platform is good and certainly as a GA flyer I would like to see all drones exposed to the same scrutiny.  So I suspect the answer will come from the CAA.  They will simply either allow or not allow systems that have sufficient integrity and robustness to fly full stop. Again, I'd welcome comments from fellow panel members. 

10:03.42 [GM] I think I think the question was also about what type of electronic conspicuity and whether we kind of like looking into it can certify a specific technology or an integration of all of them.  I think one of the purposes of this exercise is also tried to see what is the type of equipment that more people has or and what is the type of equipment that is more accessible to everyone and whether we could use the type of electronic conspicuity device to enable Class Lima airspace.  Now, I've seen also several questions about technology requirements for UAVB and for drone operators and that is one of like the primary ideas of Class Lima.  And these have a set of requirements, very specific requirements for how UAV operators in terms of navigation, visual conspicuity, electronic conspicuity. The are avoiding mechanisms should be the same for all of them.  Minima communication systems and failsafe mechanisms that those additional layers of mitigations that could be applied.

Again, all these ideas that we have been bouncing and that we would like to do to get more ideas.  The VHF position broadcast, is one of them perhaps having a failsafe positioning or escape lane for UAVs that are having failure, etc. So, I would say go to a specific altitude. And one of the advantages of UAVs is that you have lots of data on the ground of about the flight plan and about the current position of the aircraft and that's something that can be broadcasted and can be made available to many users.  So I think that there's the opportunity to generate lots of mitigations to all the air proximity of risk and ground risks.

10:05:48 [Facilitator] OK, so at this point, I will call a short break and ask everybody to please return at 10 past 10:00, where we will give everybody the opportunity to put their questions to the panel.  And we will begin by just clarifying what's the available grants for Transponder's and whether they do, in fact, cover the cost and all of the related equipment to the class Lima.  And then it would be really great if we could kick off by understanding a little bit of people's experiences with Skye Scotland, so far as I think that might contextualise various aspects of the conversation that's been taking place so far.  So please feel free to turn off your videos during the break and then I will see you back here at ten past 10:00.  Thank you, everybody. 

10:10:30 Welcome back, everybody.  So we’ll allow just a minute more to allow everyone to return from break and then we will kick off. So just a reminder to the panel. I'm going to begin by asking to please clarify the available grants. There was a comment in the chat that two months ago, oh, got getting confused with the study.  So recently there were grants made available for transponders.  So useful to clarify what the terms of those are and how exactly they relate to the Class Lima concept. So we'll allow just a minute more, I think, to make sure that we've got everybody back to take part in the conversation. Then we will proceed by covering the available grants.  And then I would love to hear a little bit about the experience with Skye Scotland so that we can learn from that experience. 

10:11:35 [JS] Facilitator, can I just raise an issue.  Unsurprisingly, we're seeing a lot of anger and angst in the chat.  Can I just remind everyone that what we're asking is whether we could collaborate to find the solution? Otherwise, what we're going to be forced to do in the future is to continue to decorate Class G airspace with brick walls and TDAs and so the spirit hopefully of this meeting will end up being constructive, to see if there is the appetite and the support to do something different.  That's the point of this meeting. I understand people's anger.  I understand people's frustration with TDAs I will remind everyone I'm a GA pilot and I love flying around Class G with the freedom I have and so I get that. I understand that. But let's not lose sight of the need to see whether there is appetite to try and do something differently.  And we've had a couple of comments. People are saying that Class Lima is segregated airspace.  Yes, it is, but it's less segregated airspace.  So but nevertheless, I think, Facilitator, I think it's [GA Pilot 1] that so the negative experience of the Oban situation.  I think it be good to allow [GA Pilot 1] to just say give his position and opinions.  

10:13:25 [Facilitator] Yes, so I will invite [GA Pilot 1] to speak up in a moment.  I'm just going to show a link in the chats, which has been kindly provided to me by Alex Pilko.  And that's links to the available grants you can visit back at your leisure.  However, I will just reiterate what Jim was just saying. The object of today is not as the first step towards forcing through an unviable system.  It is a means to invite all of you as expert stakeholders to think how we can create a successful system that can appropriately balance the needs of GA users and incorporate un-crewed aerial vehicles into potential airspace.  And as is evident in the chat so far, everybody has a huge wealth of technical expertise here.  So please continue to contribute. Now, [GA Pilot 1], if you're willing to speak up, I will ask you to on mute and please share a little bit of your experience with Sky Oban.

10:14:31 [GA Pilot 1] SkyPorts. No, I appreciate that there are good drone operators and there. Are less good drone operators.  I don't want to turn this into a rant about what has been a bad experience so far.  But there needs to be an element, a strong element of trust and respect between the drone communities.  And we have not had that from SkyPorts at all. Last year there were trials.  The consultation to be calls was a sham. It didn't get in touch with any flying real local flying clubs.  But they've then compounded that by saying that they consulted and getting information from them has been difficult.  OK, so this hasn't been a good experience. TDAs I have I have gone off, I mean, I've run a seaplane training business. I'm also the Air Traffic Control 1ler for the whole of west of Scotland.  So I'm pretty experienced to what goes on up there. At no stage has the initiative come from them to get in touch with me.  Everything has been me trying to get information from them. And it's been like drawing teeth, to be quite honest with you. The TDAs Yes. I see it's a short term solution and in a sense they've been lucky because it's been very little flying with Covid.  But that's about to change in two or three weeks time. And God knows what it's going to be like when more people descend on the area up there because because the drone operator, they don't seem to have a respect that other people are there where they are before and use the airspace and you need to get that in to drone operators because it reflects badly on everybody else.  As to the class Lima, I mean, I've invested in electronic conspicuity, I've got Sky Echo. I've got Pilot Aware I've tried them all out. I went off to try and see if I could detect the drone and it turns out that there was a software fault with their ADSB that they hadn't admitted to or whatever.  So if you're gonna do something, it needs to be that how do they prove that the ADSB works before they get airborne for a start? 1:20:44
You know, if I have ModeS in my aeroplane, it's a legal requirement for me to switch on so I don't have to test it.  I think something like Flight Radar 24, there needs to be more stations, ground stations to actually pick these things up and display the aircraft.  That, to me, seems a much better way because you've got your in the cockpit you could see everybody's got mobile phone pretty much, and everybody could get flight radar 24. You could actually see where the drones are.  But to close off these large areas of airspace for maybe six flights a day, eight flights a day, that's not really not realistic.  And they're often sitting empty because the weather is not good enough. So the last little final point was going to be on the accuracy of drones.  You know, some of these air spaces are three kilometres wide. It seems to very random the way they've been created.  Now, I thought I've spoken to people are well involved with drones. And you think the accuracy of drones is better than three kilometres.  So why is this such a massive area?  When drones could presumably if they need to return stop, turn around and get back and I don’t feel there has been proper justification or risk assessment of that.   Certainly not. It's not transparent. Does that cover a few points?  Well, I'm not I'm not against drones, but I'm really against the way this has been done so far. It's really been disrespectful. Okay. And thank you for providing this forum.  I think it really is very, very necessary. Thank you.

10:17:58 [Facilitator] Thank you very much. It's incredibly useful. Yes, so the points on necessary respect and communication is evidently vital.  So if anybody has any further points as we go through on also the format of how we can continue the consultations, I certain remarks.

10:18:17 [GM] I would like to just follow the points that [GA Pilot 1] was making from the point of view of the TDA sponsor. So I've been the sponsor of three different ACP proposals for Windraces.  And really the key for TDAs and an airspace change is proportionality And I do agree with [GA Pilot 1]  that a correct and proportional engagement of all the stakeholders is the key for a TDA proposal, say, about the size three kilometres wide. It really at the TDA, like the size of air space, change needs to be, again, proportional to the operations to the navigation performance of the of the drone and the failsafe mechanisms of the drone.  It cannot be just something random.  And also, the thing that I want to say from from from from from the point of view of of the sponsor of open airspace change, we understand how disruptive it is to put a TDA a brick wall there, I've see. I've read some comments about setting that a TDA with a danger area crossing service should be an option, should be less disruptive that Class Lima but when we've tried that, it is not always possible to have a danger area crossing service or area information service due to the not availability f of the correct level of air traffic services or lack of coverage of low altitude radar systems. So really that that sometimes it's not possible to provide the services and thus making this this case more disruptive.  Also say when you have a TDA that is active and for some reason weather changes, I think it happens here in England. It is that it takes like a lot of time for us to deactivate this TDA.  You can send an e-mail, an email to airspace operations in the CAA but that is not always person there to deactivate it.  Again, that's why we don't want to continue like doing this, this TDA. That's why we believe this is this is not the way to go. And I really appreciate the comments off [GA Pilot 1] and at least from our site from our side from Ultra.  Yes. Windracers, we will make sure that any sort of consultation and any sort of airspace change will be proportional to the stakeholders will be contacted in due course.

10:20:57 [Facilitator] OK, so based on how the conversation in the chat is progressing and because of how many people we've got taking part in the discussion today, I'm now going to introduce an interactive whiteboard that will allow us to capture everybody's contributions in a more effective way.  So, I'll just briefly explain how this will work in the chats I'm going to post link. You can click on that and it will take you to an interactive whiteboard and I will explain how to use that.  If you have any issues doing, that's if opening a browser window is going to create any problems please don't worry you can simply carry on commenting in the chats or you can speak out loud and we will scribe your response across. And also, anything that is spoken during this call can be transcribed.  That's a feature of Zoom. So anything that you say will be recorded. However, I'm going to post a link to the whiteboard now.  And that will guide us through a set of questions just to guide the discussion.  So you should see a link in a chat that says mirro, dot com, et cetera.  I'm going to start a screenshot now so that you will see what that involves.  OK, so you should see a screen now with a blue board with some questions at the top.  The way that this works is simply that if you scroll to the left of your screen, you'll see the set of icons here.  The one that I'm hovering over is a square with the corner folded in.  That's a sticky notes. If you click on that, you can select the colour.  Then click on the board and then you can type your response in.  So once you've done that, you can drag it around. You can resize it.  But all you need to worry about is click on the link. It will open up that whiteboard. You can then hover over the sticky notes icon on the left of the screen.  Click that, click on the board and you can type your response.

10:23:17 So I'm going to kick off by, first of all, asking what are the positive features of Class Lima for your use of air space based on everything that's taken up, taking place so far in the discussion? What positive features can you see to the concept of Class Lima?  So please invite everybody to just contribute any responses you might have any potential positive features of the Class Lima concept by clicking on a sticky note and putting it on the board.  And alternatively, you can leave a comment in the chat and we will return to the group just to hear from everybody.  Once we've taken a couple of minutes on this. So as ever.  Please feel free to private message me in the chat. And if you'd prefer not to use this whiteboard that’s absolutely fine. You can just type of response into the chat or you can simply say it out loud when we get to questions.  So let's just take a couple of minutes now and then we will return to the group.  I'm going to stop the screenshare. And please let me know if anybody has any technical issues and I'll do my best to account for those.  So I'm going to post that link again. That's in the chat please go across and post a sticky or any response.  You can also reply in the chat here. So the question here is what positive features do you see to the Class Lima concept?

So this is great. Thank you to everybody who's filling in the board so far. And thank you, [GA Pilot 1].  Anybody on a mobile device or similar situation? Please just continue commenting in the chat.  Absolutely no problem. If you use the chat rather than the board.  

10:26:07 [Microlight Pilot 2] Will you quickly, summarise what Class Lima is I must have missed missed it?


[Facilitator] Yes. I'll hand over to the panel again just to remind us of a top level summary of what Class Lima.

10:26:21 [JS] Well, that's a great question, actually, because we don't really know.  But it's a vision.  And the vision is how could we avoid using temporary danger areas in the future and make airspace more flexible, more permissive.  And so the goal of this session is to say, hey, is there any enthusiasm for trying to do something different to TDAs and if so, what do we need to do? That's different. So I'm sorry. It's fairly nebulous and fairly unclear at the moment. But we will send you a copy of the slides which gave our vision. I don’t know whether you missed it earlier in the presentation. Does that answer your question?

[Microlight Pilot 2] Yes, I did miss it.

[JS] Okay, we'll send you the slides.  But essentially, it's how do we avoid all the drawbacks of TDAs in work we do in future?

[Microlight Pilot 2] Also have a separate problem of having a rather unstable signal.  I keep using your speech. 

[JS] OK, Facilitator, can you hear me okay?

10:27:49 [Facilitator] Yes. We will be following up this session with sharing the slides and that will be ongoing opportunities to keep feeding into this projects as it progresses.  But for the time being, this is a fantastic start. Thank you to everybody for carrying on.

10:28:09 [JS] Facilitator, so what might happen in the future? One option is that as a result of this, we conclude it's a waste of time. We won't be able to reach agreement on something positive.  We just carry on with TDAs. My preference, however, is that this would just be the beginning of dialogue. And, you know, the chat has included, inevitably, lots of negative comments and, you know, a criticism that we haven't included all Class G Users.  And that was somewhat deliberate in that we tried to do this in bite sized chunks, because if we don't get a positive reaction, positive support from this group of space users, then we won't waste anyone's time progressing it.  And speaking to the military and although we do have some HeliMed people on the call that we haven't explicitly targeted police, military and other Class G users. So this is a step it's not the only step we will need to make and we may decide to do nothing as a result of this this forum. It's up to you. Do you support it? Do you think doing something, trying to do something is worth doing? 

10:29:50 [Facilitator] Great. So I would just mention now owing to time. We'll just round off that first point on the positive features.  We got a nice mix of responses there. I'm just going to screen share once more.  So you can see the range of responses which have been appearing here are now going to scroll down, which you will all be able to do to this next board here.  

10:30:23 [Facilitator] So this is simply moving on to the next question. How might Class Lima impact on your airspace activities? Now, various comments to this effect have been appearing in the chat so far.  So if you've had anything to record, we've already got them on the chat but it would also be helpful if you put them on the board.  And again, if anybody has any issues using the boards, you are very welcome to keep simply commenting in the chat and then we will open up to a wider discussion in a moment.  So right now, we are just going to move down to the next board, which you will be able to access by scrolling down.  And this is simply asking, how might the Class Lima concept impact on your air space activities?  

And we'll take a couple of minutes for this and return to the group.  There is just one question that I think might be useful while people are filling in the responses of how Class Lima might impacts on the air space activities. Somebody was asking in regards the panel, whether the interests being represented amongst the panel or commercial governments, academic, et cetera.  So would you mind just addressing that? So, everybody's fully aware.

10:36:35 [JS] I’ll respond to that, all the people on the panel are academics. So, we work for the universities involved in the project.  However, we are drone enthusiasts and believe that drones can offer society a benefit in the future. 

10:37:14 [Facilitator] So I’ve just put the question in the chat again.  How would Class, Lima, impact on your airspace activities, any responses you might have please add them to the board or in the chat.

10:37:26 [JS] Facilitator, we got a couple of other questions related to the question related to the question you raise.   So the question about Avionics and Autopilot, so they distributed Avionics is a company that is a spin out from the university and is an independent company from the university.  If that answers your question. 

[Facilitator] To my understanding, the spin out company is from the engineering department helped to finance these humanises students like me who never make any money for the university.  So thank you to everybody. So sorry, go ahead…

10:38:08 [JS] There's another question raised. Are there any representatives from the drone companies in the forum here?  Yes, there are. And in fact, maybe RPAS UK if they're on the call would so they represent the interests of the drone community.  So I don't know whether RPAS UK want to stick their hand up and just make a comment.  I don't know. But yes, there are representatives of the drone community on this call. 

10:34:56 [Facilitator] So there are a few general questions appearing in the charts. We will have the opportunity to address them in a moment.  I'm just segmenting the conversations with right now to ensure that we can go step by step.  But please be aware that we are seeing questions that are arising and we will have the opportunity to go over them.  So just take a minute to roundoff on how Class Lima might impact on your airspace activities and then we'll move onto the next question, which will allow us to scope out the essential issues.  And then I will invite people to open up the discussion in the chat.  So if anybody is just writing now could just finish off the Post-it notes or to type their response into the chat and then I will start screenshare again.

Great. So I'm going to stop screen sharing. Here we are. Hopefully you can see the whiteboard again now, as it did last time I'm just going to scroll down to the next board.  

10:36:18 And here we are asking, do you see any potential issues to the Class Lima concept?  You can see I've added some topics here already, including drone corridors, altitude limits and reporting priority in terms of flight path planning and reporting of near misses.  These are some potential issues that we can foresee, but really, really interested in your perspective here.  What are the potential issues? Please let us know anything that you can think of.  This is an opportunity to check on anything, whether anything has been missed so far in developing this concept.  So please. Anything is really useful.

So once again, if you scroll down to the board below, you will see this board saying, do you see any potential issues?  Please add in anything you can think of really, really useful at this point.  So we'll take a couple of minutes on this and then I will go back to the group and ask you to please jump in. 
And as ever, you are free to comment in the chat as well.

And just to say thank you to everybody for bearing with us during these technical limitations, hopefully at some point in the future, if there is a further event, that might be the opportunity to do it in person. But we do appreciate you being with us and making use of these digital tools.  
They're not ideal so we do appreciate you taking the time.

10:39:32 [JS] I don't know whether you’ve seen, Facilitator, we've had a question about sharing these whiteboards and sharing this information after the meeting. 

[Facilitator] Yes, we can do that. The link will remain the same. But I will include that to be included in any future correspondence.  I can also provide it as a separate PDF. I'll tidy up first so that there on an array of Post-it notes.

[JS] So I think it might be appropriate for Jana to just say what what we're allowed to do, because as far as I'm concerned, I would like everything to be shared.  Janet, you might want to just comment on what our plans are.

[JD] I don't think there's any problems with sharing the white ball because that pays to be anonymous. I would not want to share the video recording of this because obviously people have put comments in their names against them and anything that we would do with the data from a research point of view, we would have normalised any names against comments. Moving forward with any of this kind of data.  But yes, I see no problems with sharing slides and there's no problems with sharing the Mira Board because that's all anonymous.

[TC] Just to say to everyone that we plan to write this up anyway. All of these comments and actually structure it as a document which we will then share with all of you.  So that’s something we plan to do anyway. So we'll try to put all this into context in a document as a first stage to capture people's views.  So that's that we will definitely be doing. 

10:41:16 [Facilitator] OK, brilliant.  There's even some resources being shared in the chat addressing some of these topics.  So at this point, I will ask people to just round off what they're writing on the board or any contributions they're making the shots around this question. Do you see any potential issues?  So. We'll take. I think just to 45 past, just to open up the discussion now. So if anybody has a point they'd like to raise, please, just on me yourself. And if you'd like, you can raise a hand by using the reactions icon. And there should either be an option saying raise your hand or you can click one of the hand icons. That will mean that I can see who wants to speak. But please, just on meet yourself and go ahead and mention anything that you see as a potential issue. Who'd like to kick us off? Yes, [Other 1], I can see your hand up.

10:42:27 [Other 1] Firstly, thank you very much indeed for setting this up. It's a huge improvement over what some of the other players in the drone market have been doing and unfortunately, I also include the CAA there whilst there is a drone department and I realise completely they've been playing a vicious game of catch up and we've covered in all the rest of it.  I do feel that chasing rather than leading. And I say thank you very much for this and look forward to the output from it.

[JS] Thank you very much, [Other 1]. 

[Facilitator] Good to hear [Other 1]  would anybody else have a potential issue they'd like to highlight in the chat at this point?  Yes, please go ahead. Yes, that's right. I can't see your name currently, but I can see you in front of the bank. But please go ahead. All right. Thanks, [GA Pilot 36].  

10:43:21 [GA Pilot 36] I'm just wondering if you have got a timeline for the work that you're doing.

[JS] Well, I can speak parochially. So we with our large drone and perhaps [R and D 2] from Highlands and Islands would be prepared to chip in here. But we we intend to do some operations in Orkney, Shetland and Highlands and Islands within the next few months, actually. And so it's with a heavy heart that we we're going to start proceeding with a whole bunch of TDAs.  [Research and Development 2], I don't know whether you're on the line and whether you want to comment? 

[R and D 2] Hi Jim, thank you I’m [R and D 2], I am from the university of Highlands and Islands. As Jim said, we're running a project based in Orkney, which is looking at low carbon aircraft is what is the use of drones for medical use cases. So we really engage with all the NHS boards and other companies around the Highlands and Islands.  Having learnt lessons from other experiences in working with the local GA community, we have an explicit activity within the project to engage with the GA community to come up with a more sensitive routing for the TDA and also, the timing of it as well. So [GA Pilot 1] If you're happy to have a conversation, to be really useful to get your input into this, so maybe think through, Jim, we can exchange contact details.  We've already engaged with the strata Inverness and with the J users in and around Orkney and the Highlands.  And just to come back, if I may, Jim. A couple of points on the commercial side of this thing.  It's not as if the drone operators will need to have a business case, but this project is really based around community use cases so it's not directly through to airports, necessarily, but it's it's places that north coast of Scotland. And so it's easy to get from Glasgow and Edinburgh up to Kirkwall or to Stornoway.  But to communities on the north coast like so Thurso, Durness and Ullapool it's trickier.  So it's giving people like the NHS another option, depending on the weather and the conditions on the roads, especially in the summer on the north coast, can be congested. And somebody raised a point about the weather.  My grandfather flew in Orkney during the 1930s and they could fly quite often when the ferries were cancelled due to high winds because they could take advantage of a short weather window to take a flight across. Where the ferry was in harbour for the rest of the day.  I don’t know whether that answers your question Jim?

10:46:49 [Facilitator] I'm going to interject quickly just to time [GA Pilot 3] got a hand up. I'm going to ask you to contribute and then we'll move on to the next question.  Go ahead, [GA Pilot 3], sorry. Just. I'll just unmute you if you can click on mute.  Is. Yes. Oh, [GA Pilot 3], I'm afraid we can't hear you.

[GA Pilot 3] Yes. Yes. OK. OK. So I suppose my point question is directed to Professor Scanlon.  Now, I have a great sympathy with some with what you've been saying.  And, you know, this project clearly is a very specific project in relation to drones supporting the NHS and I get the concepts around, you know, quicker delivery of essential items for the NHS, saving people's lives, etc. But there are some I think there are some problems with the airspace Lima because actually what you're really saying is, is see you inside Lima, which is Gulf Air space you want people to be equipped with certain types of electronic, conspicuity devices and EC is not a mandated requirement by the CAA It's a voluntary equipage.  And to add to that, I would say that there are so many different R&D programmes around the UK and Europe on how to integrate drones into the flying system.  So I just wonder how you're going to integrate this project into some of those other projects, because I will have to be like a common system eventually but I have a great deal of sympathy for you trying to achieve.  I thank you for the invitation.

[JS] So [GA Pilot 3]. Thank you very much for your comments. Just to deal with that quickly, I know we're running out of time. Maybe we should have allocated more time.  We are a network and therefore our network is deeply connected with JARUS, ARSO discussions. In fact, I had a conversation with Lorenzo Mosley who does a lot of thought leadership in Europe about UTM use space so deeply familiar with European thought leadership in that area. 

Look, this initiative is something that hopefully we can all get behind. And so we won't be imposing anything. We're just going to be suggesting something. You know, we're not regulators. And there's been a lot of comments about.  So we were involved in one of the earliest trials at Manchester Airport. You know, mixing commercial aircraft with drones.  And we had police helicopters and all sorts of things in that operation.  So so we're well aware of of things like altitude angels activities and various, you know, Goodwood Initiative, the Reading Initiative.  There's a corridor at Cranfield University. We're deeply involved in that.  There's lots of stuff going on. And it's on the back of that that where we're asking the question, because most of those are focussed on, you know, full heavy UTM rollout.

And I'm merely asking the question. We are merely asking the question, is there something we can do more quickly that has a lighter touch? 
Because if we can't, we're just going to be rolling out, not just us but the drone community just can't carry on rolling out TDAs all over the place, which I don't think is a good idea.

10:50:58 [Facilitator] And just the follow on from [GA Pilot 3], who provided a nice Segway to our next question.  We've got ten minutes left and I don't want to overrun, so I'm just going to screenshare one more time.  And scroll down to the next board here from potential issues low.  We have the question, what are your views on the widespread use of electric conspicuous?  Some people have already been filling this out, which is fantastic. Let's just take one minute now just to allow people to add their views on here in particular. Lots of comments have been appearing in the chat, but the costs, the associated costs of electronic conspicuty.  So it will be all of those are recorded and will be included in the follow up and they will make their way into the reporting.  If you have any further comment, sir, or if you want to reiterate anything, be really helpful if you can just add anything in.  

10:52:01 What are your views on a widespread use of electronic conspicuty?  while people are doing that we just had a hand raised. [Drone User 2], did you want to jump in?

10:52:14 [Drone User 2] Yeah. Thanks very much. Let's say you're just to introduce myself. I'm one of the autopilot design engineers working for distributed avionics.  I just had a question in regards to Class Lima as to whether so from my perspective, what we're trying to do here is create a set of procedures that allow safe operation of drones with G.A.  And I can see various layers to this. One is one is this electronic conspicuity.  One is like the ADSVADS-B be in and out. One is this VHF broadcast.  But this is the final line. Seems to be this visual detect and avoid.  And the GA Pilots may well be aware of the drones are operating in that region they should be able to see what all routes are planned way before time.  Things like that. I was just wondering if there is a limit on the size of the vehicle proposed for Class Lima?  
Because I can see if you're a pilot, you wouldn't really want a very small quadcopter to be sort of flying around the airspace. But, you know, the final line, you could see a bright orange ultra, which is 10 metres across. So I don't know that Jim could expand on that or anyone else.

[Facilitator] And if we can keep this response short, please, Jim

10:53:26 [JS] Very quickly at our experience operating at Lea on Solent, the search and rescue helicopters there were more scared of our little foam aeroplane than our big ultra aeroplane because they could say strobes and all.

[Drone User 2] So is there any limit on the proposal at the moment? And does anyone out there…

[JS] There are no rules, [Drone User 2]. We haven't, we don't know.  We just found an idea. So that might be something that the GA community say. Say, yes, we would like a visibility of greater than X, perhaps.

[Drone User 2] Yeah. So I thought I'd throw that out there and let other people think about whether that's sensible.

10:54:11 [Facilitator] Right. Thanks, [Drone User 2]. Now on to the short amount of time we have left. If you are responding to the question on electronics conspicuity, please finish off what you're writing.  In the meantime, we just have a couple of polls. How this will work is that within Zoom, a window will pop up and we'll give you the option to respond by selecting from a range of available responses. So, Janet, I'll just ask you to please bring up the first poll to start rounding off.  

10:54:47 So to what extent do you agree with this statement? I am confident that airspace space regulations can enable drones to be used for medical logistics.

Please select a response to that. And below.

I am confident that space regulations can enable drones to be used for parcel front.

And below that I am supportive of the class Lima airspace management concept.

So there's three questions there and you can select from a range between strongly disagree to strongly agree.

If you can just take a moment to respond to those polls. That's great. 

[Glider Pilot 4] has mentioned, that doesn't currently have enough info to answer the questions. Similarly, [Other 1] has said the questions one and two, depends. So that's also useful for us to know if anybody feels similarly great. If you could comment in the chat. Otherwise, that is the option to reply neutral.  If you feel that's appropriate, but yes, if you can just.

10:56:02 [Microlight Pilot 2] Can I make a plea?

Yes [Microlight Polit 2]

[Microlight Pilot 2] Plea for those pilots who fly for leisure without radio, all the glider pilots, hell of a lot of a lot, BMA, LAA. and everyone else. We don't want to be cluttered up with electronics. Thanks. 

[Facilitator] Thank you. So, David has a question about the poll.  Are we referring to current airspace regulation processes or are we exclusively referring to the proposed Closs Lima concept?

[JS] Well, on the final question is really around the concept of working together to develop a better, shorter term solution. Really, it's ill defined, but it is rather than voting on the goal, it's voting on enthusiasm to support or develop something like Class Lima.

10:57:08 [Facilitator] Great. So we've got just over three quarters of participants responded now still climbing. Right. So that's fantastic. 

10:57:21 Shall we show the results? Yes. Great. So if you scroll through here, you can see what people are feeling. Was generally a fairly strong consensus, upwards from neutral, which is looking positive considering that this is the first step in a consultation process.  Now, I I'm just going to stop sharing those polls.  We can perhaps include them in the follow up that will be sent out to everybody. And I'll just invite back on the white board and again, please feel free to put in the chat.
We just have some leftover questions. 

10:58:05 Are there any wider challenges to shared airspace worth mentioning that haven't been covered so far? 

If you scroll below that, there is another question. What are the priorities for future research on the UAVs in shared air space?

So these are. General questions, are there any wider challenges to shared air space worth mentioning that haven't covered so far? And similarly below, what are the priorities for future research of UAVs in shared airspace?  These are general questions looking towards the future of the project. While people are filling them in, I'm going to stop, screenshot and just hand back over to the panel just to explain a little bit on next steps and how people can get in touch with any further comments.

10:59:00 [JS] So I think, [Other 1] and Janet, that perhaps if you can just share the last slide, they'll be great if you can stick it up there.

[TC] But yeah, just want to say thank you very much to everyone for participating as when we set these things that we don't really know how it's going to go and how many people we're going to get. But just the amount of comments and the chat is just fantastic, really, to see those issues.  And, you know, we've got our work cut out to summarise this and get it into a structured form which the evidence there is fantastic is the first stage is you know, getting people's opinions and issues across.  So that's the next stage. It we're going to write the workshop up. We'll include my records and everything else to comment the results of the polls and we'll try and get into a structured document to show people's issues, concerns and try to highlight some of the potential way forward for this. So that's the next stage. And then we will contact you again individually to share that with you and ask for your comments on it as well.  It'll be great to get some further feedback if you wish to comment.  And then I think we'll be looking to do more consultations, maybe in slightly different formats.  It will be great when we can meet people again physically, but we will look to do maybe some smaller focus groups of people if they're willing. But we'll give you the opportunity to participate further if you so wish to, because it would be great to keep you involved.  I've just put down the contact there for my colleague, Dr. Matt Grote who'll be kind of our liaison with us this week as we go through in terms of liaison with you.  And that'll be the next stage where we will hopefully just after Easter to get the write-up from this out to you and then get your further comments back.  But, Jim, as any last things anybody else in the panel like to say? 

11:00:37 [JS] Just a big thank you to everyone.  Really great. You have taken two hours out of your lives, your very busy lives to engage we take all the comments very seriously and I hope we can do something positive and coherent. So thank you. 

[TC] Yes. Watch this space. Sit there. Thank you all very much for participating. Thank you, Facilitator. I'll just hand over to you to close. Thanks very much. 

[Facilitator] So I have just posted a link to the E drone websites in the chat. You can access that. There's also the option for ‘contact us’ so you can submit comments or questions via that website.  That's one thing I'd just like to extend. Thank you to everybody for you for participating.  As [Other 1] has mentioned, we really do appreciate you making the time to attend in the morning on a Friday to take part in this discussion. And everything that you've contributed has been really, really valuable.  As we said earlier in the session, there are no strict rules or guidelines to this concept.  So far, it's very much in development. It is conceptual.  So everything that you have contributed so far is playing the role of shaping the concepts and making sure that it is viable going into the future. So, yes, a big thank you. We will be sending out the slides. We'll be sending out the reports built on all of the responses so far and we can share the whiteboard. The whiteboard will remain open for the time being. So if after we end this you'd like to add any more responses.  You're very welcome to do so. And then we can share a link to the final responses after the session. So, yes, all the remains. Thank you. And we hope to see you again in the future.  So thank you very much for participating today. And we will see you again in the future. 

	
